To recap, we have a combination of static field,
gradient field, and an RF pulse.
This pulse can be varied over time,
and this combination defines what's called a pulse sequence.
Once induced currents are measured,
the measurements can be represented as values in a physical construct known as k-space.
K-space is a physical concept used in electromagnetic signal processing.
Without going into too much detail,
k-space data represents effectively our image slice in a spatial frequency space.
Which means that our x and y values,
in 2D k-space image,
correspond to spatial frequency components of certain signal intensities.
For example, a high signal close to the center of k-space may
mean low-frequency value repeating every 200 millimeters,
while signal closer to the edge might mean values repeating every two millimeters.
You may be familiar with Fourier transforms,
which converts signal from time domain into frequency domain.
If so, this is basically a Fourier decomposition,
only that we use space here instead of time.
Once we have our k-space data,
it undergoes a series of transformations in what's called a reconstruction pipeline,
to obtain the final image which represents
the exact measured signal intensities in the physical space.
This is where it becomes interesting from a data science standpoint.
The reconstruction pipeline involves a lot of
optimization strategies that aim at minimizing
the time that it takes to fill the k-space,
while at the same time producing an image which is easily relatable to a human eye.
Array k-space series can range from five gigabytes to
ten gigabytes per single 3D acquisition sequence or series.
At the same time, after reconstruction,
we end up with about 100-150 megabytes of data per image.
A lot of high dimensional data gets shaved along the way and
potentially opens up opportunities for machine learning based analysis,
around either computing values based on
k-space signal or finding optimal reconstruction pipelines.
By the way, this is an active field of
research and we will post some links at the end of this section.
Let us talk a little bit about the pulse sequences.
In an MRI scanner, we have a static field that is always there,
and we use gradient fields and RF pulses to
induce change in spinner intentions and measure it.
The combination of gradient fields and RF pulses,
the sequence and duration with which they're applied is called the pulse sequence.
Different tissues respond differently to different pulse sequences.
Let's look at two which are rather commonly used.
A T1-weighted sequence involves measuring the time it takes for
protons to return to the original orientation once the external fields have been removed.
Protons and fatty tissues are the quickest to return to the original state.
Thus, fatty tissues exhibits the highest signal,
or in other words, show up as the brightest on the reconstructed image.
Fluid, on the other hand,
has the lowest signal resulting in darker areas of the image.
Conversely, a T2-weighted sequence looks at different aspects of the relaxation,
and involves measuring the time that it takes for protons to lose
the face synchronization of their spins after a pulse.
With T2 sequence, fluids exhibit highest signal while
the muscle has the lowest and fats sits in between.
Let's look at a couple of examples.
In this cross-sectional, T1-weighted image of the lumbar spine,
we see how there is a brighter or hyperintense area
in the posterior aspect of the image or in the patient's back,
corresponding to the patient's subcutaneous tissues
which are composed predominantly of fat.
Meanwhile, the fluid within the patient's spinal canal looks dark.
If we look at the T2 image of the same patient,
of the same slice now,
we see the strong bright signal from within the spinal canal,
representing the cerebrospinal fluid.
We can even see that some of the disks in the patients spine look darker than the others,
which represents age-related dehydration.